Edits to Feb updates (#192)
pragmint/open-practices: practices/implement-symptom-based-alerts.md

By focusing on symptoms instead of metrics, teams ensure that alerts are tied to the user experience rather than internal anomalies. This distinction is critical for reducing alert fatigue. When engineers are paged only for issues that degrade the customer experience, trust in the monitoring system increases. This approach filters out low-risk, self-healing, or purely internal fluctuations that do not require immediate human intervention.

Ultimately, this practice streamlines incident response and improves the Mean Time to Restore (MTTR). When an alert fires, the team knows immediately that a critical, user-facing issue is occurring, eliminating the guesswork associated with noisy, cause-based data. This alignment prioritizes resources on incidents that matter most, protecting both the customer's satisfaction and the engineering team's cognitive load.

## When to Experiment

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You're an SRE or devops engineer overwhelmed by alerts that don't require immediate fixes
* You're an engineering leader with a team that cannot distinguish between urgent incident alerts and expected, information system alerts.
* You have monitoring implemented, but you don't have any automated alerts.

```

## How to Gain Traction

> 

Reviewer: ### Host A Roundtable Discussion
* What existing alerts are consistently actionable and clearly communicate the symptom being observed?
* Brainstorm symptoms that would clearly show a degraded user experience.
* Rank those symptoms from most highest impact on user experience to least impact.
* Which symptoms are readily available with the current monitoring & observability data?
* What needs to be added to the monitoring & observability tooling to notify on the other symptoms?

Author: Looks good. Adding to md file.

## Lessons From The Field

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Prioritize High-Impact or Leading Symptoms.* When migrating to alerting on symptoms, one goal is to reduce the alerting noise. Focusing on alerting based on the earliest symptoms that indicate a significant impact to user experience reduces less critical alerts.

*Choose Alert Recipients Carefully.* When alerts are based on the symptoms, they inherently have a context where they are relevant. Send alerts to the teams that are responsible and equipped to respond. Sending alerts to individuals that cannot respond increases alert fatigue.
```

## Deciding to Pitch or Polish

> After experimenting with this practice for **[timeframe]**, bring the team together to determine whether the following metrics and/or signals have changed in a positive direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After experimenting with this practice for **2 - 3 weeks**, bring the team together to determine whether the following metrics and/or signals have changed in a positive direction.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fast & Measurable

**Higher Rate of Actionable Alerts**. The percentage of alerts that lead to action that improves the users' experience should go up because there are fewer alerts purely on metrics.

### Slow & Measurable

**Decreased Mean Time To Repair**. As teams realize each alert is more valuable, they will become more responsive to the alerts.  This should lead to a decrease in the mean time to repair. 

### Slow & Intangible

**Reduced Alert Fatigue**. Teams report that alert fatigue has reduced and they notice alerts are more valuable and actionable.
```

By focusing on symptoms instead of metrics, teams ensure that alerts are tied to the user experience rather than internal anomalies. This distinction is critical for reducing alert fatigue. When engineers are paged only for issues that degrade the customer experience, trust in the monitoring system increases. This approach filters out low-risk, self-healing, or purely internal fluctuations that do not require immediate human intervention.

Ultimately, this practice streamlines incident response and improves the Mean Time to Restore (MTTR). When an alert fires, the team knows immediately that a critical, user-facing issue is occurring, eliminating the guesswork associated with noisy, cause-based data. This alignment prioritizes resources on incidents that matter most, protecting both the customer's satisfaction and the engineering team's cognitive load.

## When to Experiment

* You're an SRE or devops engineer who is overwhelmed by alerts that don't require immediate fixes.
* You're an engineering leader and your team cannot distinguish between urgent incident alerts and expected, information system alerts.

> * You're a xxx and you have monitoring implemented, but you don't have any automated alerts.

Author: Can we add a specific persona(s) in place of my "xxx" here?

> * You're a xxx and you have monitoring implemented, but you don't have any automated alerts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You're an engineering leader and you have monitoring implemented, but you don't have any automated alerts.
```

> ## How to Gain Traction

Author: Any other actions the reader can take to gain traction?

Reviewer 2: Probably, but let's wait to define that further until we come across this on a client and contribute back what actually worked.

### Host a Roundtable Discussion
You can use the following conversation prompts:

- What existing alerts are consistently actionable and clearly communicate the symptom being observed?
- Brainstorm symptoms that would clearly show a degraded user experience.
- Rank those symptoms from highest impact on user experience to lowest impact.

> - Which symptoms are readily available with the current monitoring & observability data?

Author: I'm not sure I understand the prompt "which symptoms are readily available...". I think the word "available" is throwing me off. Would editing "available" to "observable" be accurate? Is that what we mean?

> - Which symptoms are readily available with the current monitoring & observability data?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Which symptoms are readily observable with the current monitoring & observability data?
```
